# SDCRE-NS

LICENCE (CC BY-SA 4.0): https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/
(author: A. Boley)

Overview
========

This is the "Space Debris Collisional Rate Equations -- N Shells" code. 
It uses a continuum equation approach to modelling debris evolution. 
It further assumes spherical symmetry, but with the ability to run N shells, coupled by orbital decay. 

The code treats satellites, derelicts (defunct satellites), large debris, and small debris as species in a collision rate model. 
Large debris is trackable and avoidable by active satellites, and collisions with them are considered to be catastrophic. 
Small debris is non-trackable (and thus unavoidable), but can disable an active satellite if struck.

Only one type of satellite is currently used, with a set collisional cross section and operational lifetime. 
Active satellites disappear from their shell when they reach the end of their lifetime, and are not explicitly followed through lower shells.
Each shell can have independent satellite launch rates into it (assumed to arrive instantaneously).

A fixed drag coefficient is used, but the A/M ratio can independently be assigned to satellites (and derelicts), large debris, and small debris. 
Drag lifetimes for eachs shell are calculated automatically, dependent on either the solar cycle (with an adjustable starting phase) or a fixed F10.7 cm flux. 

Quickstart 
==========

An example of importing and running the code is as follows:

```python
import SDCRENS as sdc

sdc.simSystem(Nshell=7,LowShell=470e3,HiShell=540e3,dtyr=0.000275,TENDyr=1,SprayDebS=10,NewDebS=16000,NewDebL=300,idSnap=3,beta=1.0,alpha3=0.2,mo0=0,OUTFILE="out.txt",INITFILE="orbital.distro")
```
This assumes that there exists an INITFILE called "orbital.distro", as well as the atmosphere model data "cira-2012.dat" and the solar cycle data template "solar_cycle_table36_cira2012.dat".

Variables
=========

Nshell: Number of desired shells

LowShell: The lower altitude boundary of the lowest shell in metres

HiSHell: The upper altitude boundary of the highest shell in metres

dtyr: Time step in years (fixed)

TENDyr: Number of years to integrate for the simulation

alpha1: The fraction of time that two active satellites fail to avoid each other. Default 0 (perfect collision avoidance). A value of 0.01 means that 1% of the time, two active satellites fail to avoid each other.

alpha2: The fraction of time that an active satellite and a derelict fail to avoid each other. Default 0.

alpha3: The fraction of time that an active satellite fails to avoid large debris due to many different reasons, including imperfect orbital information and incompleteness of tracked objects.

beta: The fraction of times a small debris strike disables an active satellite. Default 1. beta = 1 means one-hit-one-kill.  A beta = 0.25 means four-hits-one-kill.

P: Post-mission disposal rate. Default 0.95, which means 95% of the time the satellite is disposed of promptly. The other 5% of the time the satellite fails to deorbit and becomes a derelict.

NewDebL: The number of new large debris particles that are generated by every catastrophic collision (per satellite). Default 300.

NewDebS: The number of new small debris particles that are generated by every catastrophic collision (per satellite). Default 16500.

SprayDebS: The number of new small debris particles that are generated by strikes of small debris on satellites or derelicts. This is assumed to be a combination of effects, such as localized fragmentation. Default 10.

SatLifeTimeYr: The satellite lifetime in years. Default 5 yr. The time change in satellites in a shell due to operational lifetime is Sdot = S/SatLifeTimeYr, for satellite numbers S.

mo0: The starting month for the calls to the solar cycle table, effectively setting the phase. Between 0 and 143, default 0, start of the solar cycle.

idSnap: The shell index that you want to track to record detail evolution into the file set by OUTFILE. 

setF107: Used to override the solar cycle table and instead use a fixed F10.7 cm solar flux. Value given in sfu. Default None. 

INITFILE: The init file for setting satellite collisional size, A/M ratio for all objects, initial satellite, derelict, and debris populations, and fixed launch rates.

OUTFILE: Any name for the desired outfile for the detailed tracking in the shell specified by idSnap (id Snap Shot).

INFILE
======

The infile has a single header line followed by shell control lines. 

The header line is as follows (separated by commas)

Sat.Radius, Min.Large.Debris, Min.Small.Debris, A/M.Sat, A/M.Large.Debris, A/M.Small.Debris

The effective satellite radius (Sat.Radius) is given in metres and is used to set the collisional cross section for a single satellite. 
The minimun size for large debris (Min.Large.Debris) is the diameter in metres, although the value is not currently used (will be in future versions). It is largely for information only at this time.
The minimum size for small debris (Min.Small.Debris) is the diameter in metres, but like large debris, is currently for information purposes. 
The A/M.Sat is the A/M ratio for satellites in m^2/kg.  The A/M ratio for large and small debris is similar. 

The file then lists each desired shell for modelling in descending order (highest shell first). The line is 

Altitude, N.Sats, N.Derelicts, N.Large.Debris, N.Small.Debris, Satellite.Launch.Rate

The altitude is given in metres and the numbers of each species are just that. The satellite launch rate is the number of satellites launched into the current shell per year. 

A full INFILE might thus look like this

```
1.784,.1,0.01,0.04,0.064,0.064
530e3,0,0,380,3800,0
520e3,0,0,380,3800,0
510e3,0,0,380,3800,0
500e3,2000,0,380,3800,400
490e3,0,0,0,0,0
480e3,0,0,0,0,0
470e3,0,0,0,0,0
```

Fixed Parameters
================

The following is fixed in the code. 

The coefficient of drag is C_D=2.2. This will be changed soon so that it is also adjustable. For now, alter the A/M ratio accordingly. 

The radius of the Earth is set to the equatorial radius of 6378.137e3 metres.

The gravitational parameter of the Earth is GM = 3.9860044418e14 m^3/s^2.

